content/courses/claude-code-fundamentals/lessons/01-introduction-setup.mdx, before:

---
title: Introduction & Setup
description: Install Claude Code and connect it to your first project.
duration: 15m
module: Foundations
order: 1
---

## Where Claude Code Fits (After Context)

You already know how context works. Claude Code is simply the tool that lets you apply that context to real codebases: read files, run commands, and make edits - all from your terminal.

## Install Claude Code

**Recommended (native installer)**

```bash
brew install --cask claude-code
```

**Fallback (npm)**

```bash
npm install -g @anthropic-ai/claude-code
```

<Callout type="info" title="Keep it clean">
Avoid using `sudo` for npm installs - it often causes permission issues later.
</Callout>

## First Run

```bash
cd your-project
claude
```

You'll authenticate once, then Claude Code will scan your project and wait for your first prompt.

## Your First Prompt

Try something small and specific:

```
Show me the main entry point of this app and explain how it starts.
```

Watch the flow:
- Claude reads only what it needs
- It reports back clearly
- It waits for confirmation before changing anything

## Key Takeaways

- Claude Code is a terminal-first AI assistant for codebases
- Native install is the simplest path
- Start small, stay focused, and build from there

Commit message:

chore: checkpoint all current workspace changes

content/courses/claude-code-fundamentals/lessons/01-introduction-setup.mdx, after:

---
title: Introduction & Setup
description: Install Claude Code and connect it to your first project.
duration: 15m
module: Foundations
order: 1
---

## Where Claude Code Fits (After Context)

You already know how context works. Claude Code is the terminal tool that applies that context to real codebases: read files, run commands, plan changes, and edit safely.

## Install Claude Code

**Recommended (native installer, auto-updates)**

```bash
curl -fsSL https://claude.ai/install.sh | bash
```

**Alternative package manager (manual updates)**

```bash
brew install --cask claude-code
```

**Legacy npm path (deprecated)**

```bash
npm install -g @anthropic-ai/claude-code
```

<Callout type="warning" title="NPM installs are deprecated">
If you're on an older npm install, run `claude install` to migrate to the native install flow.
</Callout>

<Callout type="info" title="Keep it clean">
Avoid using `sudo` for npm installs - it often causes permission issues later.
</Callout>

## First Run

```bash
cd your-project
claude
```

Optional quick check:

```bash
claude doctor
```

You'll authenticate once, then Claude Code scans your project and waits for your first prompt.

## Your First Prompt

Start small and specific:

```
Show me the main entry point of this app and explain how it starts.
```

Watch the flow:
- Claude reads only what it needs
- It reports back clearly
- It asks before risky actions

## Key Takeaways

- Native install is the current recommended path
- npm installation still works but is deprecated
- Start with small prompts and verify results as you go
